---
title: 'GSOC 2023: what will I do?'
date: 2023-05-29
permalink: /posts/2023/05/gsoc-proposal
tags:
  - gsoc
  - coding
---

This year I applied for the Google Summer of Code program, and luckily was selected as a contributor for [MDAnalysis](https://github.com/MDAnalysis/mdanalysis) with my proposal for a parallel analysis project, extending the idea suggested by the developers.

In this post, I'll briefly describe the proposal itself -- motivation, technical outline, and how I expect things will change for the MDAnalysis users after the successful execution of the proposal idea.

Overview and motivation
======
As you might already know, [MDAnalysis](https://github.com/MDAnalysis/mdanalysis) is a python library for analysis molecular dynamics (MD) trajectories, which is kinda clear from the start if you look at the library's name. In turn, molecular dynamics is an ~~art~~ computational technique for simulation of molecular ensembles at various levels of detail. In structural biology, these ensembles can vary from low-level things like simulation including quantum mechanics approximations (QM/MM) to low-level simulations of large systems such as a whole cell organelle or a cell itself (coarse-grained simulations).

Technically, as a result of a MD simulation is a *trajectory*  -- a file containing coordinates of all simulated atoms (10^4-10^8 atoms) over the course of a whole simulation (10^4-10^7 time-steps). Producing such a file is hard and computationally intensive, and requires lots of GPU resources. Often, it's even harder to get insights from these simulations, and requires lots of hypothesis formulation and evaluation, coupled with a data-intensive analysis of these trajectories, where libraries such as MDAnalysis come in handy. 

However, currently MDAnalysis uses a single process to run an analysis of a trajectory. Despite all the efforts for the code optimization, it is hard to keep up with the size of the MD trajectories. Hence, utilizing a parallel approach for the analysis would be the next thing to do.

My proposal focuses exactly on this: I am planning to implement a parallel backend for the MDAnalysis library. The backend is planned to be implemented using [`dask`](https://dask.org) library, allowing users to seamlessly run their analysis either on powerful local machines or various clusters, such as SLURM.


Technical details of the project
======

Aren't headings cool?
------